Combatting Cyber Vulnerabilities with Cybersecurity Awareness Training and Education


Since vulnerabilities are what leads the way to making a cyberattack possible, it is no wonder how important they are to combat.  Preventing cyber vulnerabilities should be a top concern for organizations, especially as of lately.  When the world got hit with the Covid-19 pandemic, these attacks only increased significantly in just a couple short years (9).  Specifically. since 2021, businesses were seeing a 50% increase in weekly cyberattacks (5).  These attacks can be damaging and very expensive for organizations.  Just last year we expected a global cyberattack-related cost of $6 trillion. While the risks of an attack should be of concern to all kinds of businesses of all sizes, the industries who are attacked more than others include the health care industry, manufacturing industry, financial services like banks, the government, and transportation (9).  If the attacks are only getting worse, then what can we do to decrease the risks of attackers exploiting cyber vulnerabilities to perform attacks against U.S. organizations and its government? 

First, we will discuss some background about vulnerabilities and cyberattacks.  These attacks are performed by insider threats, hacktivists, terrorists, criminals, state actors, and advanced persistent threats (9).  These attackers could even be some of the last people you would expect.  Just recently there have been a string of cyberattacks performed by a hacker group called Lapsus$ who are run by teenagers (16).  When looking at your possible threat actors, you must remember just how much a category could cover.  For example, when you think of an insider threat, most people would think of a disgruntled employee.  However, many may forget another important possible insider threat, which could involve their third-party vendors.  For example, in 2013 Target was attacked because a vendor they used were hacked during a phishing attack (8). 

Cyberattacks can only happen when these threat actors find and exploit vulnerabilities within a system of an organization.  The steps an attacker will go through will first involve researching and gathering all the information they can about their intended target to identify a vulnerability and after that they will acquire hacking tools or malicious payloads, deliver it to the victim, and exploit that vulnerability they found to install their malicious program or script to perform their attack (9).  The vulnerabilities they find can be operational, personnel, physical, or technical vulnerabilities.  Usually, however, the vulnerabilities can include all four of the types.  For example, airports can contain multiple pathways to cyber threats such as USB drives, wireless access points, human error, smartphones, laptops, cloud computing, and more.  Which leaves them wide open to the possibility of many different types of vulnerabilities (7). 

The biggest weakness, when it comes to attackers being able to find and exploit cyber vulnerabilities, is due to human-error and human weaknesses.  As mentioned above, one form of threat actors includes insider threats.  We had already discussed Target being hacked due to a vendor being phished, but this is a common issue.  Another time, there was a Russian-ran campaign that targeted 3rd party vendors of their targets using social engineering (1).  Insider threats can also include employees who unintentionally introduce possible pathways of cyberattacks.  For example, employees using wearable devices which are extremely popular these days.  This can include earphones or smart watches, such as Fitbit.  Attackers can easily gain access exploiting vulnerabilities in IoT devices and devices using Bluetooth to perform man-in-the-middle attacks.  When employees, or anyone having physical access to an organization’s building and wi-fi connections, this will open up your organizations to a much greater attack field of which you and your cybersecurity department will have little control of (4).  The programmers that organizations use can also contribute to the human weaknesses as often, their poor coding leads to cyberattacks.  Just a few years ago poor coding accounted for over 6,000 new software vulnerabilities (15).  There can be so many people involved in the vague umbrella-terms of human-error and human weaknesses.  

This all leads to human-error and human weaknesses as being probably the biggest cyber vulnerability that an organization can face.  This shows us that cybersecurity training is just as important, if not more, than the use of cybersecurity tools for the prevention of vulnerabilities. With 92% of malware being delivered by email and the fact that 98% of attacks rely on social engineering, cybersecurity training regarding phishing and other social engineering tactics could make a huge difference when it comes to vulnerabilities actually being exploited (13).  Even training coders and programmers, in terms of best security practices, can also help decrease vulnerabilities because they are the main reason that software vulnerabilities are introduced and should be considered another level of specialized training/education that is needed (15).  Even the coders can use cybersecurity awareness training.  One study found that out of all the categories of workers, the developers were found to click the riskiest downloads which gave them a sort of double-whammy when it comes to their risk (10). If businesses and organizations put as much effort into cybersecurity related training for employees as they put their efforts into different vulnerability-fighting technologies, it would greatly decrease the exploitation of vulnerabilities.  

While it is agreed that the human-layer of organizations is important as employees not only handle so much critical data but are also just human.  This means they will make mistakes.  While this is agreed upon amongst experts, they also argue that cybersecurity awareness and training is not affective enough to contribute to the waste in funds and claim that people just fall back into bad security habits after a short period of time.  These experts don’t believe that training and education will always be ineffective but they claim that the way training is run now, that they are ineffective.  Most organizations will employ check the box training that focuses on only phishing, one and done training, and other repetitive and boring techniques; and these are the kinds that don’t make much of a difference and prove to be ineffective (3).  Knowing there are ineffective cybersecurity training programs, many experts seek out scanners as a top level of defense for vulnerability exploitation.  

We cannot rely on scanners or other technological means to prevent the exploitation of vulnerabilities but should place focus on our human layer to make the most significant change and difference.  While scanners or other technological tools for vulnerabilities are certainly effective and make a fantastic layer of defense, they do not catch everything.  One study analyzed the use of 11 popular scanners and found that to be the most effective, multiple scanners would have to be used and there is still a good chance they won’t find everything.  Especially since scanners are set up to find known vulnerabilities, this would mean vulnerabilities such as zero-days would not be detected (6).  There is also a big discrepancy when it comes to testing the technological defenses and the human layer.   Testing and probing of a system have always been focused on the technologies.  This often leads the testing and probing of the human layer.   and often overlooked when it comes to testing and probing people.  One study actually found that testing employees showed an effectiveness of a phishing campaign and their retention/what they learned.  This study found that on a 2nd round of testing employees with a phishing email, that 75% who clicked the link the first time, learned from their mistake and didn’t click the link on the 2nd round (12).  

All of this leads us to believe that using an effective cybersecurity training and education program will help decrease the exploitation of vulnerabilities.  Since the older ineffective ways were on the boring and repetitive side, it seems that using techniques that are fun, relatable, relevant, and engaging methods of providing cybersecurity awareness and training would be more effective.  Basic cybersecurity awareness has a better effect on those with no prior experience.  One study found that the participants of their study who had no prior cybersecurity or computer science training had the best results with an implemented cybersecurity awareness training program.  This was contributed to the fact that the others were already aware of the basic concepts but probably would have done better with something on a higher-level for them.  So, training and education programs should be geared towards the individual, so they are relevant to the person (11).  Also, when implementing both informal learning and hands-on learning for cybersecurity awareness and training, you yield better results of retention amongst people rather than doing one or the other.  One study found that while the level of awareness increased when implementing one or the other, that level of awareness was significantly higher when both were implemented together (2).  Then another study found that by making the cybersecurity awareness training into an actual video game in a virtual reality world where they can also be hands-on, in a way, kept their participants engaged and resulted in a higher level of cybersecurity awareness (17).  All of this shows that raising a level of engagement for the individuals who are going through the training and education, could provide much better results.

Another issue that hinders the effectiveness of cybersecurity awareness training and education has to do with limited budgets.  It has been found that most of the money that organizations put to the side for cybersecurity typically went to the technical side of cybersecurity instead of the very-forgotten human layer side. The cybersecurity budgets are always planned for more than they spend and still cut out the cyber security trainings/awareness. Utilizing the same amount of budget for cybersecurity awareness training and education as is used for technological preventions and detection would make a big difference when it comes to preventing the exploitation of vulnerabilities (14).

Another issue faced by cybersecurity awareness training and education has to do with the one-and-done methods.  This method involves bringing awareness once and thinking your job is done.  For example, say an organization runs a phishing campaign and passes out some literature on the subject then never revisits it again.  This would lead to people forgetting what they learned.  By implementing cybersecurity awareness training and education on a routine basis, it will help increase the cybersecurity awareness of personnel while also keeping them from falling into bad habits.  By implementing training continuously on a weekly, bi-weekly, monthly, and so on schedule, it will help keep the information retained within personnel and keep them from falling into bad cyber practices.

To reiterate, the best method of increasing the effectiveness of such cybersecurity awareness programs should involve interesting methods, higher budget allowance, and for the training to be done repeatedly.  Since studies have found that a more relevant and interesting program can keep people engaged and have them retain the information better.  By keeping funds from being utilized on training and education, organizations are losing a valuable resource to combat vulnerabilities.  Experts have found that employees who revisit cybersecurity awareness education often retain the information better and practice better cyber practices than those who only train once. By implementing a cybersecurity training and education program that is engaging, that gets as much financial focus as technological preventions, and is done continuously; will greatly increase cybersecurity awareness amongst personnel and decrease the possible exploitation of vulnerabilities.


References


1. Atherton, K. (2018, March 28). It's not just elections: Russia hacked the US Electric Grid. Vox. Retrieved March 8, 2022, from https://www.vox.com/world/2018/3/28/17170612/russia-hacking-us-power-grid-nuclear-plants
2. Aurélien Baillon, Jeroen, de B., Aysil, E., Evelien, van de V., & Bram, van D. Informing, simulating experience, or both: a field experiment on phishing risks. Plos One, 2019.
3. Bishop, E. (2021, June 9). Council post: Seven reasons why your company's security training isn't working. Forbes. Retrieved April 3, 2022, from https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2021/06/09/seven-reasons-why-your-companys-security-training-isnt-working/?sh=69eca2476a64 
4. Blow, F., Hu, Y., & Hoppa, M. (2021). A study on Vulnerabilities and Threats to Wearable Devices. Journal of The Colloquium for Information Systems Security Education, 7(1). https://doi.org/979-8-6425-4896-7 
5. Brooks, C. (2022, January 24). Cybersecurity in 2022 – a fresh look at some very alarming stats. Forbes. Retrieved March 7, 2022, from https://www.forbes.com/sites/chuckbrooks/2022/01/21/cybersecurity-in-2022--a-fresh-look-at-some-very-alarming-stats/?sh=4559dae6b616 
6. El Idrissi, S., Berbiche, N., Guerouate, F., & Sbihi, M. (2017). Performance Evaluation of Web Application Security Scanners for Prevention and Protection against Vulnerabilities. International Journal of Applied Engineering Research, 12, 11068–11076. Retrieved from https://www.ripublication.com/ijaer17/ijaerv12n21_76.pdf. 
7. Gopalakrishnan1, K., Govindarasu2, M., Jacobson3, D. W., & Phares, B. M. (2013, June 19). Benchmark evaluation of Hog descriptors as ... - ijtte. Cyber Security for Airports. Retrieved March 21, 2022, from http://ijtte.com/uploads/2013-12-30/5ebd908d-514d-31efIJTTE_Vol%203(4)_8.pdf 
8. Keskin , F., Caramancion, M., Tatar, I., Raza, O., & Tatar, U. (2021). Cyber Third-Party Risk Management: A Comparison of Non-Intrusive Risk Scoring Reports. Electronics. 10(10):1168. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics10101168
9. Kitchen, K., & Di Pane, J. (2020, July 24). Cybersecurity: National policies and ... - geopolitic.ro. Cybersecurity: National Policies and Practices for Understanding Hacks and Reducing Vulnerabilities. Retrieved March 21, 2022, from https://www.geopolitic.ro/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/BG3512.pdf 
10. Ovelgonne, M., Dumitras, T., Prakash, B. A., Subrahmanian, V. S., & Wang, B. (2017, February). Understanding the relationship between human ... - dl.acm.org. Understanding the Relationship between Human Behavior and Susceptibility to Cyber Attacks: A Data-Driven Approach. Retrieved March 23, 2022, from https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2890509?download=true
11. Peker, Y., Ray, L., Da Silva, S., Gibson, N., & Lamberson, C. (2016, September). Raising Cybersecurity awareness among college students. CISSE. Retrieved April 9, 2022, from https://cisse.info/journal/index.php/cisse/article/download/55/CISSE_v04_i01_p12.pdf/ 
12. Prei, K. (2017). Measuring Personnel Cyber Security Awareness Level Through Phishing Assessment. Retrieved April 3, 2022. 
13. PurpleSec. (2021, August 6). 2021 Cyber Security Statistics Trends & Data. Retrieved January 9, 2022, from https://purplesec.us/resources/cyber-security-statistics/ 
14. Rodrigue, T. (2021, January 8). The power and politics of cybersecurity: A quantitative study of federal cash windfall allocation as a measure of impact on comprehensive cybersecurity posture. Proquest. Retrieved April 9, 2022, from https://www.proquest.com/openview/cd80f5df29fac6f3ecd9f578d0ca8019/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y 
15. Thomas, T., Tabassum, M., Chu, B., & Lipford, H. (2018, April 1). Security during application development: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM Conferences. Retrieved April 3, 2022, from https://dlnext.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3173574.3173836 
16. Tidy, J. (2022, March 24). Lapsus$: Oxford teen accused of being multi-millionaire cyber-criminal. BBC News. Retrieved April 20, 2022, from https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-60864283
17. Veneruso, S., Ferro, L. S., Marrella, A., Mecella, M., & Catarci, T. (2020). A game-based learning experience for improving cybersecurity awareness. CEUR Workshop Proceedings. https://doi.org/CEUR-WS.org/Vol-2597/paper-21.pdf 


